# CS-537: Introduction to Operating Systems
# Lecture-3

## Office Hours
Thursday 3-4pm CS 7367 (7th Floor in CS Building)

## Course Policies
Max two slip days for the first 3 projects (individual)
Max two slip days for the last 3 projects (group)

## CS Username
m0mosenpai

### CPU Scheduling
if timer interrupt ->
- *Hardware* process context is saved in the kernel stack in order to resume it at a later point in time. (User mode registers)
- *Hardware* move to kernel mode
- *Hardware* jump inside the interrupt (trap) handler
- *OS* switch() routine
- *OS* save kernel regs(A) to proc-struct(A) (Kernel mode registers)
- *OS* restore kernel regs(B) from proc-struct(B) (Kernel mode registers)

**_Virtualizing is making each process believe that they have access to all resourcees and they are the only process that matters_**

### Scheduler
#### Jobs
- a process is divided into a set of jobs(arrival_time, run_time)
- jobs are ended by I/O
- they switch between CPU and I/O
- the scheduler only chooses a job from the ready queue

#### Restrictive Assumptions
- all jobs run for the same amount of time
- all jobs arrive at the same time
- only use CPU, no I/O
- run-time for each job is known

#### Possible Policies
**Metric-1 (Turnaround time = time_to_completion - arrival_time)**

1. FIFO (first in first out) -> performs poorly if we break assumption 1
2. SJF (shortest job first) -> non-premptive (only schedules a new job when previous job voluntarily gives up the CPU)

We need preemptiveness!

**Metric-1 + Metric-2 (Response Time = start_time - arrival_time)**

3. STCF (short time-to-completion first) -> high response time!

Let's switch more often between processes to reduce response time!

4. Round-Robin -> better response time, worse turnaround time! (some overhead to switch too)

Removing assumption 2 and 3

5. I/O Aware Scheduling ->

What is used in the real world today - MLFQ!

6. MLFQ (multi-level feedback queue) (general purpose scheduler) ->
    - must support "interactive" (low response time) and "batch" (low turnaround time) programs

    **Approach**
    - multi-level round robin
    - each level has a higher priority than the lower level
    - pre-emptive!

    **Rules**
    1. if priority(A) > priority(B) -> A runs
    2. if priority(A) == priority(B) -> A & B run in RR
    3. Processes start at top priority
    4. if job uses a big chunk of time, it's demoted (assumed as a batch-job)
    5. After some period S, lower jobs are promoted to avoid starvation

    Gaming the scheduler?
    A job could doing some I/O just before it's time slice ends.

    4. _(Updated)_ Once a job uses up it's time allotment at a given level (regardless of how many times it has give up the CPU), it get's demoted

**Metric-1 + Metric-2 + Metric-3 (Fairness)**

It's important to consider this factor so 2 jobs of same type get equal resources.

continued...
